Aesthetic Theory : Loss of certainty
Theodor Adorno

Today it goes without saying that nothing concerning art goes without, saying, much less without thinking. Everything about our has become problematic: it's inner life, it's relation to society, even it's right to exist. One would have thought that the loss of an intuitive and naïve approach to art would be offset by a tendency to increase reflection which sees the pond chance to fill the void of infinite possibil this has not happened. What looked at first like an expansion of art turned out to be it's contraction. The great expanse of the unforeseen, which revolutionary artistic movement began to explore around 1910 did not live up to the promise of happiness and adventure it had held what has happened is that the process begun at that time came to corrode the very same categories, which were its own reason for being. And ever increasing number of things, artistic, or drawn into an ED of new taboo, and rather than enjoy their newly one freedom, artist, everywhere, or quick to look for some presumed foundation for what they were doin this flight into a new order, however, flimsy, is a reflection of the fact that absolute freedom in art — which is a particular – contradicts, abiding unfreedom of the social that is why the place and function of art and society have become uncertain. To put it another way, the autonomy are gained after having freed itself from its earlier cult function and it's derivatives dependent on the idea of humanity. Society grew less humane, became less autonomous. Those constituent elements that were suffused with the idea of humanity have lost their force.

All the same, autonomy is an irrevocable aspect of art. There is no point in trying to ally the self doubts of art – doubts, incidentally, which fine expression in art itself – by restoring to her social role. Such attempts are in vain. Today, however, autonomous art shows signs of being blind. A trait of art from time and memorial, blindness in the age of emancipation, has become a dominant characteristic, despite, and because of, the fact that, as Hegel realized, art can no longer afford to be naïve art. Nowadays, artistic sophistication, amalgamates itself with the naïve of a different and stronger kind, which is the uncertainty about the purpose of art, and the conditions for its continued existence. Did art not lose its foundation when it gained freedom and external purposes questions like this touch on interesting historical nature of aesthetics.
Works of art, it is said, leave the real empirical world behind, producing a counter around of their own, a realm, which is an existent like the empirical world. This claim is false; it implies in a priori affirmation of that which is, no matter how tragic the content of the work of art may be. Those clichés about art, casting a glow of happiness and harmony, over an unhappy and real world are loathsome because they make a mockery of any emphatic concept of art by looking only at perverse bourgeois practices, such as the employment of art as a dispenser of solace. These clichés also point to the wound of art itself. Having disassociated itself from religion and it's redemptive truths, was able to flourish. Once secularized, however, art was condemned for the lack of any hope for a real alternative, to offer to the existing world, a kind of solace that reinforced the fetters autonomous art had wanted to shake off. There is a sense in which the principle of autonomy is itself solace of this kind, for in claiming to be able to posit a well rounded totality entirely on its own, the principle of artistic autonomy willy-nilly creates the false impression that the world outside is such a rounded whole, too. They rejecting reality — and this is not a form of escapism, but an inherent quality of art – art vindicates, reality

Helmet Kuhn’s thesis that every work of arts is a paean would be true, if it were critical and spirit, which is not which it is not. Given the abnormalities of real life today, the affirmative essence of art, while an integral part of art, has become insufferable. True art challenges its own essence, thereby heightening the sense of uncertainty that dwells in the artist.

It would be wrong, too, to try to dispose of the art through abstract negation. Art undergoes, qualitative change when it attacks its traditional foundations. This art becomes a qualitative different entity by virtue of its opposition, at the level of artistic form, to the existing world, and also by virtue of it, readiness to aid and shape the world, neither the concept of solace, nor its opposite refusal, captures the meaning of art.